Martin Bell? Oh hello Martin, it's Marcia here. Hi, thanks for getting through to me.
So I'm grateful to you for giving me your time this afternoon Martin, I really am. Oh
that's no problem, happy to. Oh thank you, because I'm actually recording this, is that
okay with you? Yes, sure, yes. And what I'll do is when I finish I'll transcribe it and
send you a copy so you can look through it and add or take away or correct, is that alright?
Fine, yeah. So I wonder how much time do you have? Well what's needed really, I don't
think, I haven't got anything else in my diary but I don't want to waste too much of your
time. Well I won't be more than an hour I would say. So I wonder if you could just in
your own words just introduce yourself, who you are and your involvement with the grant
living levels. Yes okay, well my name is Martin Bell and my day job is Professor of Archaeological
Science at the University of Reading. But for the last 38 years actually I've been doing
archaeological research in the seven estuary, originally on the English side at Breen Down
and then since 1991 on the Welsh side, particularly focused around Goldcliff where I've been looking
at sites dating from the Mesolithic period around 8,000 years ago right up to the end
of the Iron Age and we've excavated loads of sites and we're still working on the recording
of sites in that area. So when the Living Levels Project came along it was a really
great opportunity to convey some of the information that we've got out of all these years of work
on the archaeology of the foreshore of the seven estuary to a much wider audience and
to begin to train up local people in the sort of techniques which would enable them to record
sites in the future. So we've done a few training courses and we hope to do some more and we've
also had lots of lectures and we've helped Newport Museum with a new display on the archaeology
and helped the Newport Wetlands Centre with some archaeological material as well.
So when you were working on the other side of the estuary did you look across and think
right we've got to check that place out too?
Yes partly, that was it because the same deposits occur on both sides but actually the main
catalyst was a skilled steelwork technician called Derek Upton who worked at Glenwerne who
started finding lots of sites and told us about them and got us involved in investigating them
and he worked with us for many years, well these 10 years, guiding us around the site showing us
what he'd found and you know we're still plugging away really recording and investigating many of
the sites that he found as well as other sites that we've found since then but you know he played
a really important part in alerting everybody to the rich prehistoric archaeology of the seven
estuary along with a very different character, an academic geologist called John Allen who was a
colleague of mine at Reading University who sorted out the sedimentary sequence of the whole of the
seven estuary and was able to show that the deposits that Derek Upton had found wooden
structures and artifacts in were actually prehistoric. John Allen sadly died in the autumn
after a very successful career as a geologist.
So did Derek approach you when you were still working in Bream or had you already come over here?
Sort of yes, I mean actually as far as I can remember the first point of contact when I
met both Derek Upton and John Allen was actually a conference that we had at Western Super Mayor
which was prompted by the threat at the time building the seven barrage and the conference
was really designed to try and alert people to the archaeology of the estuary and that's when
I think when I first met Derek Upton and John Allen and we they got me interested in
in the things that had been found on the Welsh side as well. So I might
um leap around a bit Martin so please bear with me.
That's fine. So Derek was a steel worker absolutely no disrespect to him because I've
heard so much about him but why did you take him seriously?
Um well I suppose because when he took me out to see things it made sense and also you know he was
a voluntary warden for the Gwent Wildlife Trust and I'm very interested in nature conservation
and wildlife so I mean we were talking the same language really we understood one another and
got on well and you know archaeology is a subject where anybody can make a really outstanding
discovery and and Derek did you know and and I think his great contribution was
was knowing the estuary so I mean he wandered around there from childhood yeah I mean that was
his that was his leisure time activity really and going out in the estuary looking at the
the birds and the wildlife and finding archaeology.
So do you sorry carry on. So he got a really intimate knowledge of of it and and recognised
that when he was finding you know wood structures buried in sediments that that they must be quite
old well at first you know he did go along to some sort of professional academic archaeologists
and you know he got a bit of a brush off people said well you know they're probably very recent
and that sort of thing but the the trouble was you said they were working from a mindset of
dryland archaeology you know they knew what to expect in a um on a dryland site but at that time
um you know 30 odd years ago they hadn't really got their heads around the sorts of things that
you might find in a in a intertidal wetland and it all seemed a bit incredible but I think gradually
I mean not just myself but other archaeologists Stephen Oldhouse Green at the National Museum
and Alastair Whittle in the Archaeology Department at Cardiff realised that what Derek was telling
us about you know made sense and was important and then we checked that out of course by getting
radiocarbon dates on some of these wood structures that he'd found um you know that some people
thought were probably going to be very modern and we discovered that they were bronze age or iron age
so the picture built up from there really. I know it's not a very academic um scientific
measurement but do you think he had a good instinct then for this? Oh yes yes he did yes
yes I think it's I think it's very pertinent actually that well his instinct was derived from
an intimate knowledge of the landscape really you know he'd looked at it he saw how the sediments
formed um and he realised that some of this stuff had got to be old yeah and I mean it included
things like you know footprints human footprints at Uskmouth um that we now know are you know
around 8 000 years old and I think you know I think a lot of people were probably fairly
skeptical of that to begin with but now of course we found these human footprints on lots of sites
and we know that they're buried in sediment sequences of known dates and so on um so um
you know I think it was his sort of intuitive understanding of the the landscape and the
environment that was enabled him to think outside the box actually that's really the key thing he
wasn't approaching it from the point of view of the sort of you know knowledge and understanding
of a trained archaeologist um which which might have which might have made him skeptical about
they were but but he was it was based on his own personal observation and deduction um you know
interestingly enough you know he wasn't somebody who found easy to write any of that down actually
yeah you know he was his passing on of knowledge was almost entirely by word of mouth actually
wow gosh so what sort of man was he oh a remarkable man really I mean very um
very kind and and generous um uh you know extremely knowledgeable about about wildlife and
and and the and the history of the estuary an absolute encyclopedia really
um well see what do you also describe into um I'm sure I've spoken to some of my team Bob Trett
that um he knew how to navigate that area beyond the scene wall you know where it was safe to walk
and stuff oh yes yes I mean he's the he that taught me that actually really you know it is quite a
it is quite a knack because there are dangerous places and you do have to be very careful
but he but he'd walked it all and he got a sort of map in his mind really I mean he couldn't have
drawn out a map I don't think yeah at least he never did but I mean he knew how to find things
um which he'd seen years before in some cases yeah because the mud you see the mud and sand
are moving around all the time so you know you can go down there you find something and then you
go back two weeks later to show somebody else and it and it's gone it's covered up for the next four
years or something um but he would be able to you know take you to a spot where he'd found something
years before um knew exactly where it was it's an astonishing ability although I think you know many
sort of country people and um farmers and so on have a similar sense don't they of the patch that
they know yes Derek's patch was a bit more unusual you know it was about well at least 30 kilometers
long and um you know 500 meters wide sort of thing so what what what what were his spectacular
finds what were his most spectacular finds yeah um well I suppose um yes let's think about this
I mean there were there were many um but I think the human footprints at usk mouth were among the
most important um he was also um the main finder along with bob tret of the iron age buildings
at gold cliff which set off the whole of my research project there really um that that
happened in 1991 after a big storm they went down there and they saw these rectangular buildings
um and at the time people thought oh well they've got to be quite recent um but we got
radiocarbon dates and they were iron age wow and we excavated them and we've been working there
ever since on sites of different dates gosh um so that was important and he also discovered the
bronze age settlement at redwick which we've excavated and he was um instrumental in the
discovery of the bronze age site at cauldicot which is not in the intertidal area but it's in a
in a lake that was made in the grounds of cauldicot castle and when they were making the lake um the
machines dug up bits of wood and some metal work and derrick realized that those were
prehistoric and reported them and that led to a to another big excavation I didn't do that
excavation it was done by nigel nailing also another one of his finds is the may gore pill
medieval boat that was found in a when um when he took some visiting german scholars to
to look at may gore pill during one of our field seasons and um and he realized that these bits
of timber sticking out of may gore pill were were part of a boat and that led to a an excavation
again by nigel nailing and the boat was very successfully lifted um so you know those are
probably his most um significant um finds that um you know in all um uh what is it four four
cases led to you know quite big excavations and published monographs um but there are quite a
number of others as well other other discoveries and as far as I know you know all his main
discoveries I think have been published actually um all because he generously shared his information
with other people you know he wasn't able to to write them up himself but he involved other people
and helped them you know launch a project that that investigated them
amazing isn't it that's what's said to collaboration yes it's quite it is quite unusual
because I think you know there are other you know quite gifted as it were amateur archaeologists
that find a lot of stuff but some of them don't share it yes at all and it and it sort of dies
with them really which is a great shame um yes because of course Derek died young really and
in tragic circumstances so I mean in a way it's fortunate that that all this stuff was um you know
by that stage largely written up although I suppose there may well have been other things
that I don't know about that um that were were lost with him but so would you say um uh that
this sort of excavation it is is it would you say it's a new and emerging science
in this sort of wetland area or oh yes yes very much so I mean um at least when we started you
know um the intertidal archaeology well it um at gold cliff started in 1991 um but there had been
some some work earlier in 1986 at usk mouth and a few other bits and pieces and at that time it was
pretty well completely well fairly fairly new although you know there've been some earlier
projects um in some cases one or two bits of work decades before not in the seven estuary but
but in other other parts of the uk um but they were very small scale and I think the potential
of intertidal archaeology um really has mainly been recognized as a result of the work that
went on in the seven estuary from the from the late the mid 1980s onwards really um because it's
not just a matter of you know one or two sites here and there they're they're all over the place
yeah um and every time we go there we find something um partly because the seven estuary
is so incredibly unusual you know it's got this enormous tidal range um so the the sea goes out
for kilometers and um it's got a thick sediment sequence which has got you know sites of well
all dates really um buried within it so what why um why the the arrival why was so late in the day
this um becoming alert to the potential of this area um uh yes that's a good question isn't it
I don't I don't think there's an easy answer to it except that um
I would you know archaeologists were a bit um bit fixated on on dry land sites yeah um and
in south wales I think very fixated actually on roman and medieval archaeology um you know the
prehistory of of that area which most of these sediments are prehistoric and the prehistory had
had been little worked on in fact even now we know far more about the prehistory of the
the wetland in the intertidal zone than we do about the dry land oh really um you know which is
which is extraordinary although actually the archaeology of the dry land has advanced a lot
since um in the last 20 or 30 years but even so I think we've got nothing like the level of
information about it that we've got from this narrow strip on the intertidal zone and that's
because that the the particular circumstance is being preserved in the silt yes that's right
because it's these sediments are wet all the time and they preserve wood structures and a lot of
environmental evidence yeah things like footprints not just human footprints but animal footprints
most dryland situations all the wooden posts and things you know that make up trackways or
or buildings they've um decayed away in a wetland context you find the wood preserved so um
so did you have to forgive me for saying this Martin but did you have to learn on the job
or is that something you know it seems is it quite niche this sort of archaeology yes it's it's it's
it is quite quite niche um but um and yes i mean i i did have to learn on the job and i was fortunate
in that i had um two um great advisors one was john coles who was the guy that
pioneered the wetland archaeology of the Somerset levels and probably the most
widely respected wetland archaeologist in the world and john coles actually died
in the autumn as well but so he was one of our advisors but my colleague john allen was the other
advisor on the sediment side and then we got people like derek and a great team of supervisors
that we were able to hire um who'd worked on things like um waterlogged um uh waterfront sites
in in london yeah i mean different sorts of sites but also with preserved woods so they've got
expertise in that field yeah um so we were able to put together a really good team actually
each of whom had you know knowledge in aspects of the problem and then gradually from that we built
it built the sort of um experience to to know how to deal with these sites
do you um i i often imagine that uh it must be really challenging because you only have small
windows in which to work don't you because of the time yes that's right i mean the sites i'm
working on at the moment are in the bed of the of the seven estuary between four and five meters
below ordnance datum yeah um and there you only have you only have about an hour and a half
oh my goodness that spring tides yeah those spring tides occur for um about four or five days
every month or in some cases every two weeks yeah um so they're tiny little windows and of course
sometimes especially at this time of year the the low tide falls in the middle of the night so you
can't do anything yeah um and then there's a period from um about may till mid-august when
there are no suitable tides um at all because the tidal range is is low during the summer
so um i guess in the course of the year there are probably i actually never really counted it up
but you know there are going to be probably 20 days something like that that are really suitable
to work on sites like that and on those 20 days you've only got about an hour and a half in the
most critical um area so it's a matter of you know working very fast and um knowing exactly what
you're going to do on a particular tide so that you're building up an additive picture all the
time but is it possible that when you go back the following day it's been covered up again
oh yes it's always been covered up to some extent but i mean it might just be covered up by a thin
film of mud yeah or sometimes it might be covered up by 10 or 20 centimeters of sand yeah which is
you know very difficult to shift if you've only got an hour and a half to uncover something
photograph it make a plan and record it but what tools do you use out there then sorry what tools
do you use tools um well a range of tools um i mean the main tool i use at the moment actually
is water to wash off things that are partly exposed so i'm out there with a as the tide goes down
yeah i'm out there with a bucket of water standing in the water filling up the bucket and chucking it
where there are little bits of interesting sediment exposed yeah and that way i can use
the sea to wash away some of the mud or sand that's accumulated and see whether there's
anything significant there but we have to use plastic and wooden tools particularly because
other other tools damage the the wood um and so that's quite difficult do you have you ever
got caught out by the tide um well um not not seriously but you know there are times when um
when it comes in very quickly but i mean we're we're quite fortunate actually in the area where
we're working um there is a gentle slope from the site upwards so um uh although the tide comes in
very quickly at the bottom of the slope um once one's got to the the slope itself you know even
at a crawling pace one would be able to to move more quickly than the tide comes in so and it's
it's not um as dangerous as as it might be but of course you've got to avoid areas of of quicksand
and deep mud oh my goodness are there many of those yes um but you know i've never got um
completely stuck and and and nobody that has been working with me has ever got completely stuck but
i mean it would be possible too and and i suppose if one was very cold and exhausted
you know that could be that could be difficult and of course it's not somewhere where you can
work on your own no you've always got somebody with you yes yes um so um do you know um
developments say like the the new um it's not new anymore the second seven bridge and
once upon a time the proposed seven barrage and um it must shift the um the the the bed of the river
or the estuary did have you have you noticed the impact of those developments yes very very much
so yeah um i mean most of my work isn't isn't particularly near the the new seven bridge but
um just in in um when was it january i think of of of 2020 um i went down to see some sites that
were underneath the bridge where medieval um woven fish baskets in large numbers i mean 20 or more
had been exposed by erosion and the the the tremendous scouring around the um the giant
rectangular concrete pillars that support the the the box structure of the bridge
um and it's exposing these fish traps medieval fish traps all the time um so there's there's a
lot of important stuff they're being exposed and and not really being recorded at the moment
although it has been worked on in the past in fact um rick turner who was the i think the main sort
of archaeological inspiration behind the living levels project he pioneered the study of um
fish baskets and other finds when the second seven crossing was was being made yeah um the other big
change that's happened as a result of the bridge is the build-up of sediment um which is sea wood
of the bridge as far as i can see where there's been quite a quite a development of a sediment
deposition so sites that were exposed before the bridge was built are now deeply buried by
by mud so it's it's certainly caused um significant changes but then the other issue there is that
there are there are big changes in the behavior of the estuary going on anyway for all sorts of
that we don't fully understand but it's to do with the pattern of of weather and climate and
maybe the incidence of westerly winds and big storms so you get these well sort of cyclical
changes occurring um which affect what's exposed have you experienced that over the decades then
you've been working down there you've observed that yes yes and my colleague john allen um the
sediment specialist has actually documented these things going back um least three or four hundred
years oh really gosh so for you martin what what's been your most exciting discoveries
um well let's think well i would say the footprints actually although of course you know in a sense i
i share that discovery with derrick upton and and with others because different people have found
them in different places but um i've found a lot of uh of fine examples at gold cliff um and um
you know i think that's the thing that sort of captured people's imagination yes um most um
and i suppose the you know the discovery that of how much iron age um archaeology there was at
at gold cliff in the we've we've excavated eight rectangular buildings there and 16 trackways why
and but of course you know all these things are done by by a team of people really you know i had
i had about um i suppose about 40 people working with me at a time at gold cliff to
excavate those buildings and record all the stuff that derrick upton had originally found
so when you say trackway what do you mean what is a trackway is it a roadway well it's a laid
wood structure of various types i mean some of them are bits of round timber let's say
uh about a meter long all laid one next to another so that people could walk across
the salt marsh or the reed swamp um without sinking in others are bits of larger round timber
laid along the line of a trackway to create the same sort of effect and still others are
much more sophisticated where you take some bits of round timber let's say 70 centimeters long with
a pointed end and you stick them in diagonally at 45 degrees to make a sort of cross piece
yeah and then you put either planks or brush wood across the top to make a raised walkway
that's probably where there's shallow water rather than than a than a muddy surface yeah um so there
are lots of those in in the estuary particularly at gold cliff but a few in other places as well
so i wonder why gold cliff and redwick seem to have a concentration is that because you've just
been digging there um no i think it's i think gold cliff it's i think the explanation is straight
forward really that there was an island there oh yeah an island of bedrock in the middle of
okay um and that island was about one kilometer by half a kilometer yeah um and that provided
an ideal place for well exploiting the the resources of the estuary yeah probably
particularly fish but other resources as well what are the other resources then what were the
other resources yeah um well um probably birds although to be honest we haven't got very much
evidence of that but bird bones don't survive terribly well and later on in the iron age
and the bronze age actually the key resource was grazing animals on the salt marsh so that's what
rectangular buildings that gold cliff and redwood were to do with grazing cattle and sheep because
it was very rich nutritionally yes exactly and and really good pasture seasonally you know it
wouldn't have been much use in the winter yeah because it would be terribly terribly wet and
and um you know big difficulty with animals getting stuck and so on but there's a period from
about may until the middle of august when the tidal range is reduced and the salt marsh plants
are really you know coming into their own and very very productive and that i think is when
people would have been grazing their animals down there and the same thing went on in salt marsh
environments into into recent times actually oh really um you know it was a it still is used as
a grazing resource where it survives but actually there's very little proper salt marsh surviving in
the seven estuary now it's quite restricted where would you find find it today then at peterson
okay um there's there's a reasonable area at peterson actually although it's not it's
it's grazing is is not well um i suppose i better not pass any comment on the grazing
some of it seems to involve horses and things right okay yeah i'm not clear that it's that
it's really managed in a traditional way and there's there are issues about the ownership of it
at gold cliff there's a triangle of salt marsh beside gold cliff hill which i think is still
grazed by by sheep um and um you know that's probably grazed in a in a fairly traditional
sort of way so has to sort wash be been washed away then over the decades yes that's the problem
you see once the sea wall becomes established yeah um as i mean there's probably been some sort of
sea wall in much of the seven estuary since the roman period but certainly by medieval times
sea walls were were sort of fixed yeah and so what happens then is you get the erosion of the
salt marsh on the seaward side of the sea wall yeah um but but the the salt marsh can't sort of
retreat inland of course because the sea walls there okay yeah you've got a constantly diminishing
salt marsh so at times in the mesolithic or the iron age um salt marsh probably extended right
from the present sea wall um to the to the rising ground you know let's say flanworm or somewhere
you know you could have had around six kilometers wow not all salt marsh perhaps i mean it would
have been a mixture of salt marsh mud flats yeah um raised bog in places and thin woodland yeah
but those are all you know really important wildlife habitats yeah um and now um what you've
got is a well the salt marsh is largely gone except at places like peterson and and gold cliff
um and and i think that near a cardiff there's some there's some salt marsh remaining um and
the other environments of course have largely vanished as well apart from mud flats which are
which are still extensive at low tide but um so you often when when you know
reads about the the the levels you often hear about you know the land being reclaimed and
habitated and you know it's been described to me as a you know monumental civil engineering
project really so what you're seeing in your early history archaeology are you seeing examples of
land reclamation or is it just farming with what seeing do you see what um what i'm mostly seeing
in the bronze age and iron age and perhaps in the neolithic but less evidence for the neolithic
is people utilizing a landscape um in order to
obtain grazing um and and particular resources yeah fish and and so on and all the other wetland
resources that would be useful you know like reeds and yeah and so on all the plants that they would
have would have used they're not in up until the roman period altering the landscape in a deliberate
way okay and so we don't find evidence of drainage and reclamation yeah until the roman period i
would say i mean some people have argued otherwise but i don't think the evidence for that is at all
good actually um in the roman period we certainly do get um evidence for the making of low banks
to keep the sea out yeah and we've got that at gold cliff and making of ditches to drain
areas which were probably behind low banks or sea walls and you've got that
um very clearly at gold cliff at nash in the sewage works um and in rumney um on the um the
went loop level um uh lots of evidence for roman activity and the same thing over on the english
side actually yeah so i think the romans drained the levels without any doubt i think they also
protected some of it from the sea with with a probably a rather low sea wall that probably
didn't keep out all the um all the all every tide but that kept most of them out and and and
probably all of them out for the period of the summer when most of the the area would have been
most intensively used but by the roman period we know that people were actually living on the wetland
because there's traces of settlements and buildings and wells and things i mean steve
ripon will be able to tell you a lot more about that because that is that's his subject and not
really mine okay so what would you say your um what is yours ancient history iron age no my
my subject is is is environmental archaeology and geoarchaeology okay pre-history i suppose really
so what does that mean then martin um well the period that i specialize in is is up to but not
including the roman period really okay okay but because i'm an environmental archaeologist
i'm interested in people's relationship with the with the landscape and how people have changed
the landscape okay um and the the sediments as well you know that's that's part of it the sediments
the vegetation the evidence for plants and animals so that side and that's you know in a way why i'm
so uh passionate about the living levels because it helps to bring together the archaeology the
heritage and the the nature really so in in the evidence you've gathered and and excavated how
have you seen people change in the landscape um well um if it's not so much how in the periods
that i'm dealing with in the seven estuary not so much how people are changing the landscape
except by using it yeah um it's more about how they're fitting in okay a changing landscape yeah
and taking advantage of the opportunities that that it provides um so they will have been changing
the landscape i mean for instance in the bronze age there are so many footprints of cattle on the
peat surface in the entire zone yeah but it's obvious that it was a really significant grazing
resource yeah i would argue probably just for part of the year you know three or four months probably
and and the the that grazing would have had a significant impact on the vegetation yeah um
um we we know that when salt marsh and it's grazed today that it that it has a different
vegetation composition from you know untouched salt marsh as it were so their their activities
are changing it in that way but it's not like the the sort of much larger scale um all deliberate
alteration of the landscape by the creation of of things like fields and and so on that you get
in a dryland situation it's more people utilizing resources um in the in a constantly changing
coastal situation so it it sounds to me like it could keep on giving this this area oh yes i think
so i mean it's you know it's eroding all the time and what's more the sand and the silt is moving
around all the time so you know there will be things exposed at the next low tide yeah that
have probably never been never been seen before um the trouble is of course you know will one be
there to record it and um and i suppose you know it's um perfectly valid criticism in a way that
my research has inevitably especially over the last five or so years been very much focused at
um
i didn't didn't mention this previously but one of the the uh the most exciting things we've found is
a is a wooden fish trap of mesolithic date the only example that's ever been found in um the
british isles except for a couple of examples in ireland actually goodness me so how old is that
then would you say um it's um about 7 000 years that's extraordinary and it's right down in the
bed of the estuary the lowest site we've ever found wow and that makes it particularly difficult
because it's um you know it's got the the shortest time of exposure gosh so was it was it recognizably
a fish trap i mean well yes i mean it's actually a series of v-shaped um lines of well wooden posts
making a v-shape yeah only about four or five meters long by two and a half meters wide yeah
um and um woven around these posts the posts are about four centimeters in diameter i suppose
there are little thin um bits of um round wood which are sort of woven around to make a basket
yeah so it's um yes i think i would say it's quite recognizable
god the fish trap and that was a totally unexpected discovery three years ago yeah when we were doing
a drone survey to try and make a plan of our human footprints yeah and to to to make this plan we had
to put down a series of 12 targets which were like well like big crosses on on them on plastic
yeah in order to enable the drone to match up hundreds of photographs that it took
in order to make a sort of composite plan and one of these targets was put down somewhere where
we'd never looked before yeah and my colleague tom walker who's worked with me on all this for
for several years realized that there was a line of wooden posts there wow yeah we thought well
that's interesting but we expected they would turn out to be medieval actually yeah and then
we got a radiocarbon date and and we've now dated i think six of them and all of them are
metalic that's extraordinary very exciting yes it is it is yeah i suppose in recent years that's
the most exciting discovery really so the use of drones have been very useful for you yes i mean
yes transformative in that case because actually without the drone it was impossible to make a
proper plan yeah you know when you've only got um an hour and a half at a tide yeah and the area
that you're dealing with is you know um well the core survey area for the footprints is
is about 800 meters by 200 meters yeah and it's very complex you know there are lots of different
sediments exposed with footprints in some of them and then other moving banks of gravel and sand
and so on burying everything sometimes you know getting a proper plan was only possible with this
drone but then you know there was this amazing spin-off really but i may be um
sounding ignorant here but do you use lidar at all yes not um not in the seven estuary
intertidal zone okay and actually partly because of course the trouble with the tides okay yes
you know you're very lucky if you've got got some your lidar pictures taken at the right time
right okay yeah you know the um the tide's got to be out yeah um so i use lidar quite a lot in
dryland situations but i've never actually found um an existing lidar data set um that um
um you know had been taken at the appropriate time for the area that i'm working in the seven
estuary although of course if it was flown specifically for that which is expensive yes
you know one could get that and it would be incredibly valuable are you surprised at how
much interest your work and your team's work and its discoveries have um attracted
a wide generation yes i would i would say so i mean we've had lots of um you know interest from
the general public you know the lectures that have been organized by the the living levels have been
very well attended by local people um and then there's been quite a lot of interest from
over the years from television programs and so on i think we've had i don't know i've never
counted them 15 television programs that have that have come to film particularly the footprints
um well they're so relatable aren't they the footprints yes exactly i think they capture
people's imagination and of course that's good from our point of view not only does it make them
the work that we're doing more widely known but it also provides a you know another form of record
actually yes you know there's our academic photographs and plans and notes and reports but
you know a bit of television uh footage is is um you know in some ways more more accessible to
to to the average person so is the work ongoing do you think the archaeological work ongoing down
yes yes it's ongoing at the moment in a in a pretty modest way yeah i mean largely myself
and and tom walker um when we haven't got lockdowns we visit um i don't know six to eight
times a year when there's a suitable low tide and we record what's exposed yeah and we've got quite
shopping list of other things that we want to do oh yes some of which we're you know gradually
getting on with others will depend more on on trying to raise a grant from somewhere oh my god
and that is difficult actually oh gosh yeah in the present in the present climate i had one
grant application that would have enabled me to do everything i wanted to complete there yeah
and it was two days away from submission to the national geographic society in america yeah when
they pulled the entire grant round because of covid oh my goodness really and they still haven't
reinstated it so um that was a tremendous blow really oh gosh huge blow yes god do you do you
attract international interest then in your work yes we we've had um we had a a good coverage in
the national geographic in the past oh have you really yeah two photographers yeah and from
from new york to work with us for a week when was that then martin um that was i can't remember
um probably about um six years ago six or eight years ago yeah um and a journalist
from switzerland also came from them to write a write an account of what was going on so
there's been that that interest and quite a lot of international interest from archaeologists
yeah what from archaeologists who work in similar environment yes particularly i think yes
yes because the techniques we're using and the types of things we're finding are
relevant to them and the great growth in coastal and intertidal archaeology in britain
has been um mirrored in you know many other parts of the world actually yeah so we've
you know we benefited from collaboration and advice with colleagues in denmark and scandinavia
the nevelands north germany um canada and and america in particular but other places as well
yeah well martin i'm very conscious of the time i i've been talking for now and then i don't want
to keep you too long but um i wonder if i had any more questions i could add them to the transcription
when i send it through yes of course yes would that be okay i'll pop the answers onto onto that
that's that's lovely it's happy to help in any way i can thank you so much it's been so nice to chat
and thank you so much for putting up with me in my uh ignorant questions but they weren't at all
ignorant actually i think they were you know it seemed very pertinent well i hope so i mean it's
so fascinating you know it's something it's so tangible when you say you find a fishing net that
or trap that is you know several thousand years old it's just it just sparks the imagination i
mean do you do that when you find something like that do you try to imagine what the lives were
like are the people who made it and put it there yes yes yes that's uh that's half the fun of it
really and it's certainly very exciting for us really to you know never quite know what you're
going to find you know usually something interesting turns up and a huge benefit of
working in the same area for decades really because the picture builds up all the time you know
yeah it's not as if you're duplicating what you already know it's as there's often completely new
things oh it's so exciting but martin thank you so much your time i am really grateful
good luck with the completion of your thank you well this is actually um i'm doing a short book
so um this is what i'm working on now um so um this will appear in the book at some points
probably next year i should love that's terrific i mean it's i think it's very good that you're
providing some permanent record like that actually because i think so that's these lottery projects
they can be um you know a bit difficult from that point of view once they end you know
that's it wondering what the what the legacy yeah and you know it's um yes everything's going
to record office but not everyone um uses archives it's and that's what i was keen that those who
don't normally maybe wouldn't access heritage or culture like that maybe they would through a book
so it's really good the project management have agreed to that now and yeah thank you so much
martin fine happy to help in any way i can oh lovely you take care now yeah thank you bye